---
layout: post
title:  "Jekyll, part 2: Generating a barebones page"
date:   2019-09-24 18:30:00 +0200
categories: [jekyll]
---

## Preface
---
This post will show you how to generate a barebones page and preview it locally.

## Create it
---
Jekyll comes with the functionality to generate a skeleton for your site. Suppose your new site project would be called
"bitsAndPieces", you would generate the skeleton like this:
```
bundle exec jekyll new bitsAndPieces
```
This will generate a folder named *bitsAndPieces* with contents similar to the following:
```
bitsAndPieces:
├── _posts
|   └── 2019-09-24-welcome-to-jekyll.markdown
├── 404.html
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── about.markdown
├── index.markdown
└── _config.yml 
```
For some reason my version of jekyll uses a full *\*.markdown* file extension rather than just a *\*.md* one which
apparently **really** bugs me.

Now, the *_posts* directory is the place to put your posts and as you can see there's an autogenerated one already. The
Gemfiles handles project dependencies, don't worry about them for now. The *about.html* is intended to contain whatever
you think your about page should contain and the *index.markdown* is the entry page to your site. The default theme will
generate a list of your posts on the index page so you can leave it untouched if you wish. The _config.yml is the
configuration for the site and jekyll will use this while building.

## Run it
---
You can view the page locally navigating into the project folder and running
```
bundle exec jekyll serve -w
```
This command builds the site and runs a local version accessible at `localhost:4000`. The `-w` switch (shorthand for
`--watch`) enables jekyll to continuously monitor the directory and rebuild when changes are made. This way you don't
have to restart the process every time you need the review a change.

Go check it out.

## Change it
---
Now, the open *_config.yml* and change the title to something else than *Your awesome title*, because, honestly, that
sucks. Change or comment out (place a \# at the beginning of the line) what else you see fit. Refresh the page in your
browser and there you have it.

The next part of the series, [Jekyll, part 3: Creating posts]({% post_url 2019-09-25-jekyll-part-3-creating-posts %}),
will focus on creating the first post.
